[WIP][RFC] Ordered-chapters walkthrough/guide (#54)
Irrational-Encoding-Wizardry/guide.encode.moe: encoding/mkv.md

# Mastroka Container Tricks

*Disclaimer: this page assumes some basic knowledge of the Mastroka container,
Python, and VapourSynth.*

## Background and Preparation

The Mastroka Media Container is an open source,
open standard multimedia container
that is heavily used in the fansubbing scene.
Mastroka video, or `.mkv` files
are the standard for soft-subbed releases
as they allow for multiple subtitles tracks and chapters
which are a somewhat unique feature to the container.
The MPEG-4 Part 14 or MP4 is another container format

> but it is limited in its usefulness for fansubbing.

Reviewer: Imo we have enough *time* to explain why that is the case, unless this is already mentioned somewhere else in the guide and we can just refer to it.

The following steps will require

> VapourSynth,

Reviewer: Why is vapoursynth not linked?

[MKVToolNix GUI + CLI][toolnix],
and [FFmpeg][] to be installed
(or readily available as binaries).
A [Mastroka-friendly player][mk-playback], preferably [MPC-HC][] or [mpv][],
will also be required for testing the files.

The examples will be using pre-made subtitle tracks,
a BDMV source,
[VSEdit](preparation.md#the-editor),
an [audio-cutting Python script][acsuite.py],
and a multitude of utility scripts/functions to help speed up the process.

What we will be doing:

> 1. Extracting audio tracks from BDMV .m2ts files

Reviewer: Newline between these.

Also, it seems more natural to me to write 
```
We will: 

1. Extract …, 
1. Trim, 
… , and
1. Create …
```
but YMMV.

1. Trimming audio to match our VapourSynth video trims
1. Creating mkv files from individual tracks
1. Creating chapters for said files
1. Creating virtual timelines with ordered chapters
1. Using multiple audio codecs in the same 'apparent file'
1. Using editions to change between NCOP and OP
1. Creating a playall file with ordered chapters

[toolnix]: https://mkvtoolnix.download/downloads.html
[FFmpeg]: https://ffmpeg.zeranoe.com/builds/
[mk-playback]: https://github.com/hubblec4/Matroska-Playback/blob/e48149b500ce80c38ebc07ccf8f74f8af45e89b2/src/PlayerOverview.md
[MPC-HC]: https://github.com/clsid2/mpc-hc/releases
[mpv]: https://mpv.io/installation/
[acsuite.py]: https://github.com/OrangeChannel/acsuite

> ### Starting with a clean work environment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Preparing the work environment
```

The following steps should be done from within a folder containing
all of the files (episodes) re-named to some simple format like `ep##.m2ts`,
as having multiple `00004.m2ts` files won't be helpful.
The example scripts provided will assume this workflow.

## Extracting the audio

> If the source files you are working with are not .m2ts,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the source files you are working with are not `.m2ts`,
```

re-encoding your audio into PCM / WAV is *still* recommended

> as slicing some lossless or lossy codecs is not precise.

Reviewer: What about FLAC here? Are there lossless codecs that don't decode or losslessly convert to WAV/PCM? All others should be easily spliceable.

Author: I'm going to leave the testing up to someone else for the time being. The whole 'not starting with a BDMV source' part of this page is gonna be a TODO for some time.

<!-- TODO: which ones? -->
If you are working with a BDMV source,
it is likely you will need a more complex method
to extract an audio track from the transport stream files.
This can be done with FFmpeg or [tsMuxeR][].
Using FFmpeg we can extract only the audio stream 
using the following command[^1]:

```sh
ffmpeg -i ep01.m2ts -map a:0 ep01.wav
```

If the desired audio track is not the first,
`-map a:#` should be changed to the track # shown by `ffprobe`.

*If you are following along with the next few steps,
you don't need to extract the audio just yet.
The audio-cutting script will apply this FFmpeg command to the files

> automatically.*

Reviewer: This (and later similar occurances of full-paragraph italics) would be a good candidate to appear in a note box. I don't know/remember if gitbook has something like that by default, but there must at least be a plugin to do this and I'd like to have the possibility of using those throughout the guide.

Author: See my comment on the PR.

[tsMuxeR]: https://www.videohelp.com/software/tsMuxeR

> ## Starting with trimming the video

Reviewer: Beginning a section with "Starting" is weird. This should be rephrased.

Provided are examples of trims that may need to be made
to cut the OP/ED out of an episode,
and possibly any other unwanted frame-ranges
(some blu-ray streams have a silent black screen at the end,
which should be cut out).

Starting with the BDMVs,
our first step is to trim the main episodes out.
This requires knowing the frame ranges, shown below.
Second, we will crop out the NCOP/NCED files
as they also have unwanted frames at the end.

The first time the OP appears,
we will also want to note this frame range

>  and on what episode it occurs,

Reviewer: Leading space here.

as we will only need to encode the OP once.
Same goes for the ED.

```py
import vapoursynth as vs
core = vs.core

bdmv01 = core.lsmas.LWLibavSource('ep01.m2ts')
bdmv02 = core.lsmas.LWLibavSource('ep02.m2ts')
...
bdmv13 = core.lsmas.LWLibavSource('ep13.m2ts')
bdmvNCED = core.lsmas.LWLibavSource('nced.m2ts')

> bdmvNCOP = core.lsmas.LWLibavSource('ncop.m2ts')

Reviewer: I personally find it pretty weird to do all of this in a single file instead of the normal per-episode encode script and it looks like you need to convert these trims into separate function calls for acsuite later anyway.

Regardless, the way I currently understand it it would lead to having to keep two scripts in sync regarding the trims you make and might adjust later.

Since there are no chapters for these four clips, we will be using acsuite's
`eztrim`.

In order to save time, we will be using `acsuite.audio_trim`
as a wrapper for `eztrim` and FFmpeg's audio extraction.

*If the desired audio track is not the first,
add `track_no=#` to the `audio_trim` arguments.*

```py
import acsuite as ac

# op = bdmv01[30042:32201] --> eztrim takes these frames directly (30042, 32201)
# ed = bdmv02[30978:33111] --> (30978, 33111)
# nced = bdmvNCED[:2133] --> (0, 2133)
# ncop = bdmvNCOP[:2158] --> (0, 2158)

ac.audio_trim('ep01.m2ts', (30042, 32201), ez=True, name='op')
ac.audio_trim('ep02.m2ts', (30978, 33111), ez=True, name='ed')
ac.audio_trim('nced.m2ts', (0, 2133), ez=True)
ac.audio_trim('ncop.m2ts', (0, 2158), ez=True)
```

The above lines can be ran individually in a new Python instance
in your working directory.
After this is complete,
there will be 8 new files in your directory:

- `ed_cut.wav` *
- `ep01.wav` (delete)
- `ep02.wav` (delete)
- `nced_cut.wav` *
- `nced.wav` (delete)
- `ncop_cut.wav` *
- `ncop.wav` (delete)
- `op_cut.wav` *

Files marked with an asterisk * are our trimmed audio files.

> The rest are artifacts from the FFmpeg extraction that can be deleted now.

Reviewer: Is the script aware of these intermediate files for caching purposes? If it is not, you might as well delete them from the script.

Author: Yea, it is but how should I remove them cross-platform?

Reviewer: I don't see what part of this argument is cross-platform? `os.unlink` works on all. Regardless, if these files can be considered a cache, you can leave them be or cache them in a subdirectory to keep things more organized. From a workflow standpoint, however, I hate having to delete intermediate files I'm not going to look at again and rather have the tool that created them do that for me.

In the author's example, episode 12 only contains one chapter
so we will also cut this with `eztrim`.

```py
ac.audio_trim('ep12.m2ts', (0, 34213), ez=True)
```

- `ep12_cut.wav` *
- `ep12.wav` (delete)

### Files with chapters

For our main episodes, the trimming process is more complex.
The `octrim` function was designed to automate this,
and the exact syntax and usage can be found in the docstrings.

To save time, we will be using the same `audio_trim` function
we used previously to avoid manually extracting audio tracks.

#### Finding our chapter frame ranges

For `octrim`, we will need the chapter frame ranges (inclusive)
and optionally their names. The frames here are from the **untrimmed source
clips (bdmv01, bdmv02, etc.)**.

Putting these into a Python script as lists of 3-tuples (start, end, name)
will help later when trimming the audio.

*Note: for `chaps01`, `'Part A'` starts on frame 0 and ends on frame 3770.

> The ending number can be left off

Reviewer: Explain the usual case first and the odd case later.

chaps08 = [(0, 3932, 'Part A'), (6090, 'Part B'), (16543, 'Middle Card'), (16664, 30448, 'Part C'), (32584, 'Part D'), (33662, 34021, 'Preview')]
chaps09 = [(0, 719, 'Part A'), (2878, 'Part B'), (11581, 'Preview'), (11701, 31000, 'Part C'), (33134, 'Part D'), (33662, 34021, 'Preview')]
chaps10 = [(0, 791, 'Part A'), (2949, 'Part B'), (16448, 'Middle Card'), (16568, 30160, 'Part C'), (32296, 'Part D'), (33662, 34021, 'Preview')]
chaps11 = [(0, 287, 'Part A'), (2446, 'Part B'), (18892, 'Middle Card'), (19012, 29081, 'Part C'), (31216, 'Part D'), (33661, 34020, 'Preview')]
# chaps12 = (0, 34212, 'Part A') --> already cut with eztrim
chaps13 = [(2158, 'Part 1 - "You Never Let Us Down"'), (16374, 'Middle Card I'), (16494, 'Part 2 - "Always Growing Closer"'), (17797, 'Middle Card II'), (17941, 'Part 3 - "Let\'s Change You Into This!"'), (27171, 'Middle Card III'), (27291, 30473, 'Part 4 - "I\'m Your Big Sister"')]
```

Once we have these lists,
we will call `audio_trim` with them and their respective files.

```py
import acsuite as ac
ac.audio_trim('ep01.m2ts', chaps01)
ac.audio_trim('ep02.m2ts', chaps02)
...
ac.audio_trim('ep11.m2ts', chaps11)
ac.audio_trim('ep13.m2ts', chaps13)
```

> Running the above script with Python (may take a few minutes to complete)

Reviewer: Parentheses in new line.

will result in *many* new files in your working directory.

For the author's example, the resulting files and their sizes are:

- `ep1_cut.wav` -- `ep13_cut.wav` (total: 2.9 GiB)
- `(ed|op|nced|ncop)_cut.wav` (total: 65.6 MiB)

[acshelp]: https://github.com/OrangeChannel/acsuite/blob/a7e36aa65533a93bbaaa75b6fc5345194b27a5df/acsuite.py#L127

## Encoding the audio

We will be using FFmpeg's *libopus* and *flac* encoders.

> The following examples simply loop[^2] the command for every `ep*.wav` file,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following examples simply run[^2] the command for every `ep*.wav` file,
```

and all four op/ed files.

For the main episodes, we will be using opus:

```sh

> $ fd -e wav --regex "(_cut)" -E 'op*' -E 'ed*' -E 'nc*' -x ffmpeg -i {} -c:a libopus -b:a 128k -cutoff 20000 {.}.opus

Reviewer: You don't do anything with the capture and `--regex` is the default, so just use `fd .e wav '_cut' …`. Besides, if you exclude `*op*` and `*ed*` you can skip the nc exclude.

```

And for the OP/ED's, we will use FLAC:

```sh
$ fd -e wav -E 'ep*' -x ffmpeg -i {} -c:a flac -compression_level 12 {.}.flac
```

This results in the following files:

- `ep1_cut.opus` -- `ep13_cut.opus` (total: 259.7 MiB) 91.3% reduction
- `(ed|op|nced|ncop)_cut.flac` (total: 39.8 MiB) 39.3% reduction

Normally, using two different audio codecs within the same file
would not be possible.
However, ordered chapters make it possible for each file to use its own codec

> (as long as the track order is the same).

Reviewer: Anything about compatibility for this?

*For the audiophiles who like to keep their anime music lossless,
we've encoded only the OP/EDs with FLAC.
This leaves the episode to be compressed more efficiently with a lossy codec
such as opus, for those who don't like 'wasting' space with lossless audio.
Since we are encoding around 90% <!-- TODO: recalculate --> of the show with opus,
and only have the OP/ED + NCOP/NCED files occurring once,
the filesize difference and lossless music should satisfy both groups.
Normal dialogue should be nearly transparent at 128 kbps with opus,
but this comes with some caveats.
If there are 'insert' songs within an episode that you'd like to keep lossless,
you will need to encode the entire episode with a lossless codec.*

## Working with ordered chapters

> *At this point, you should have encoded clips of each episode

Reviewer: This paragraph doesn't need to be in italics, imo.

plus the OP/ED/NCOP/NCED encodes.
The following assumes these clips are named in the same `ep##.264` format
as the .m2ts files.
In our working directory, we should also have subtitle tracks, `ep##.ass`,
and the encoded audio tracks `ep##_cut.opus`.
If you used the above audio-cutting commands,
chapter files in plaintext should also be in the folder.*

At this point, you can delete the .wav files and move the .m2ts files
out into their own folder.
Your working directory should now look like this:

![Clean Working Directory](images/mkv/example_directory.png)

### Muxing

Before we can start using ordered chapters,
we will have to mux the current files into mkv's.
This is because ordered chapters reference other mkv's by their UID
to generate the virtual timeline for the player.
MKVToolNix can save chapters *into* existing mkv files,
so this step will be the **only time** we mux.

This can be done with the MKVToolNix GUI,
in which case the order of the tracks in the bottom list is important.

> Although mpv will only warn that tracks are mismatched,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although mpv only emits a warning when tracks are mismatched,
```

> it is a good idea to keep the same track order in all of the mkv's.

Reviewer: Pretty sure this is not how you pluralize abbreviations, but someone more knowledgeable should verify this.

In our example, we will use
*Video*, *Audio*, then *Subtitles*
as the order for every file.

The order can be changed with the arrows or by dragging the tracks
in the bottom box of the *Mulitplexer* window in the GUI:

![Track order matters!](images/mkv/arrows_to_change_track_order.png)

This can also be done automatically using the command line.
An example Python script (with no attachments):

```py
import shlex, subprocess

video_eps = ['ep{:02d}'.format(i) for i in range(1, 14)]
video_op = ['ed', 'nced', 'ncop', 'op']
videos = video_eps + video_op

audio_eps = ['ep{:02d}_cut.opus'.format(i) for i in range(1, 14)]
audio_op = ['ed_cut.flac', 'nced_cut.flac', 'ncop_cut.flac', 'op_cut.flac']
audios = audio_eps + audio_op

for n, a in zip(videos, audios):
    args = shlex.split('mkvmerge -o {0}.mkv {0}.264 {1} {0}.ass'.format(n, a))

>     subprocess.run(args)

Reviewer: Same as discussed in discord. :wink: Build a list and run that. Also, the internal variable name for the first parameter is `cmd` and that better fits what we're building here.

Author: It seems to be 
```py
def run(args: Union[bytes, str, Sequence[Union[bytes, str, PathLike]]], ...
```
so maybe what you're thinking of is some other library or an older version of subprocess?

Reviewer: Maybe I was confusing things, then. I still find "args" to be a weird choice because it obviously contains the executable as the first element, but my argument regarding the internal name seems to be debunked.

![Derive end timestamps](images/mkv/derive_endtimes.png)

After deriving the end timestamps,
delete the last chapter,
as it was a placeholder generated by `octrim`
to determine the end timestamp of the last chapter.

On the *Edition entry*, we can now tick *Ordered*:

![Ticking ordered](images/mkv/chapter_editor_ordered_tick.png)

At this point, if we were to mux these chapters into our episode 2 file,
they will act like normal chapters,
and the episode will play without the OP and ED.

### Adding in our OP

Before we add in the OP,
we need to determine the timestamps needed for the timeline
to reference our `op.mkv`.

If we had chapters generated for the OP,
we could simply copy over those timestamps
(we will do this with our *playall* file later).
Instead, we will simply use the number of frames in the entire op
to determine the end timestamp.

From our trim, `op = bdmv[30042:32201]`,
we find that the clip is $$32201-30042=2159$$ frames long.
This can also be found from `op.num_frames` in VapourSynth.

Using a small [script to change frame numbers into timestamps][f2ts.py],
we find that 2159 frames translates to `00:01:30.048291667`.

> This can also be accomplished with this following line in a Python instance.

Reviewer: What does "Python instance" refer to exaclty?

```py

> for _ in input().split():print('%02d:%02d:%09f'%((m:=(s:=int(_)/23.976)//60)//60,m%60,s%60))

Reviewer: You should *never* use `_` as a variable name because that has special meaning in interactive sessions and is used as a "drop this" convention in scripts.
